Update explainer with recent resolutions (#538)
openui/open-ui: research/src/pages/popup/popup.research.explainer.mdx

## Focus Management

> Elements that move into the top layer may require focus to be moved to that element, or a descendant element. However, not all elements in the top layer will require focus. For example, a modal `<dialog>` will have focus set to its first interactive element, if not the dialog element itself, because a modal dialog is something that requires immediate attention. On the other hand, a `<div popup=hint>` (which will more often than not represent a "tooltip") does not receive focus at all (nor is it expected to contain focusable elements). Similarly, a `<div popup=async>` should not immediately receive focus (even if it contains focusable elements) because it is meant for out-of-band communication of state, and is not meant to interrupt a user's current action. Additionally, if the top layer element **should** receive immediate focus, there is a question about **which** part of the element gets that initial focus. For example, the element itself could receive focus, or one of its focusable descendants could receive focus.

Reviewer: potential examples for popup=async

```suggestion
Elements that move into the top layer may require focus to be moved to that element, or a descendant element. However, not all elements in the top layer will require focus. For example, a modal `<dialog>` will have focus set to its first interactive element, if not the dialog element itself, because a modal dialog is something that requires immediate attention. On the other hand, a `<div popup=hint>` (which will more often than not represent a "tooltip") does not receive focus at all (nor is it generally expected to contain focusable elements). Similarly, a `<div popup=async>`, which may represent a dynamic notification message (commonly referred to as a toast), or potentially a persistent chat widget, should not immediately receive focus (even if it contains focusable elements). This is because such popups are meant for out-of-band communication of state, and are not meant to interrupt a user's current action. Additionally, if the top layer element **should** receive immediate focus, there is a question about **which** part of the element gets that initial focus. For example, the element itself could receive focus, or one of its focusable descendants could receive focus.
```

since highlighting doesn't seem to be working, this is the text i updated/added:
>Similarly, a `<div popup=async>`, which may represent a dynamic notification message (commonly referred to as a toast), or potentially a persistent chat widget, should not immediately receive focus (even if it contains focusable elements). This is because such popups are meant for out-of-band

Author: Thanks - I used your suggestion.

> Elements that move into the top layer may require focus to be moved to that element, or a descendant element. However, not all elements in the top layer will require focus. For example, a modal `<dialog>` will have focus set to its first interactive element, if not the dialog element itself, because a modal dialog is something that requires immediate attention. On the other hand, a `<div popup=hint>` (which will more often than not represent a "tooltip") does not receive focus at all (nor is it expected to contain focusable elements). Similarly, a `<div popup=async>` should not immediately receive focus (even if it contains focusable elements) because it is meant for out-of-band communication of state, and is not meant to interrupt a user's current action. Additionally, if the top layer element **should** receive immediate focus, there is a question about **which** part of the element gets that initial focus. For example, the element itself could receive focus, or one of its focusable descendants could receive focus.

Author: Done.

To provide control over these behaviors, the `autofocus` attribute can be used on or within popups. When present on a popup or one of its descendants, it will result in focus being moved to the popup or the specified element when the popup is rendered. Note that `autofocus` is [already a global attribute](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/interaction.html#the-autofocus-attribute), but the existing behavior applies to element focus on **page load**. This proposal extends that definition to be used within popups, and the focus behavior happens **when they are shown**. Note that adding `autofocus` to a popup descendant does **not** cause the popup to be shown on page load, and therefore it does not cause focus to be moved into the popup **on page load**, unless the `defaultopen` attribute is also used.

> The `autofocus` attribute allows control over the focus behavior when the popup is shown. When the popup is hidden, often the most user friendly thing to do is to return focus to the previously-focused element. The `<dialog>` element currently behaves this way. However, for Popups, there are some nuances. For example, if the popup is being hidden via light dismiss, because the user clicked on another element outside the popup, the focus should **not** be returned to another element, it should go to the clicked element (if focusable, or `<body>` if not). There are a number of other such considerations. The behavior on hiding the popup is:

Reviewer 2: Nit: everywhere else you reference popup as lowercase so this should be done here as well

Author: Done. I think I got them all, but let me know if you see more.

- A popup element has a **previously focused element**, initially `null`, which is set equal to `document.activeElement` when the popup is shown, if a) the popup is a `auto` or `hint` popup, and b) if the [popup stack](#the-popup-stack) is currently empty. The **previously focused element** is set back to `null` when a popup is hidden.

- When a popup is hidden, focus is set back to the **previously focused element**, if it is non-`null`, in the following cases:

>     1. Light dismiss via close signal (e.g. Escape key pressed).

Reviewer 2: Is "close signal" defined somewhere in the HTML spec as I don't see them defined here outside of the eg's scattered throughout the doc. I won't block the PR on this but we should get this further defined.

    2. Hide popup from Javascript via `hidePopup()`.

>     3. Hide popup via a **popup-contained** triggering element with `hidepopup=popup_id` or `togglepopup=popup=id`. The triggering element must be popup-contained, otherwise the keyboard or mouse activation of the triggering element should have already moved focus to that element.

Reviewer 2: Again not blocking this PR but we should have some examples of these solutions.

Author: I added another sentence, but I'm open to specific suggestions for examples here.

>     3. Hide popup via a **popup-contained** triggering element with `hidepopup=popup_id` or `togglepopup=popup=id`. The triggering element must be popup-contained, otherwise the keyboard or mouse activation of the triggering element should have already moved focus to that element.

Reviewer 3: It might be worth clarifying that **popup-contained** means "contained in the popup we are currently closing, or one of its children" rather than "contained in any popup".

Author: Yep, good point. Done.

    4. Hide popup because its `popup` type changes (e.g. via `mypopup.popup='something else';`).

 - Any other actions which hide the popup will **not** cause the focus to be changed when the popup hides. In these cases, the "normal" behavior happens for each action. Some examples include:
    1. Click outside the popup (focus the clicked thing).
    2. Click on a **non-popup-contained** triggering element to close popup (focus the triggering element). This is a special case of the point just above.

>     3. Tab-navigate (focus the tab-focused thing).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    3. Tab-navigate (focus the next tabbable element in the document's focus order).
```

Author: Done.

### Nested Popups

> For at least `popup=auto`, it is possible to have "nested" popups. I.e. two popups that are allowed to both be open at the same time, due to their relationship with each other. A simple example where this would be desired is a popup menu that contains sub-menus: it should be possible to keep the main menu showing while the sub-menu is shown.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For at least `popup=auto`, it is possible to have "nested" popups. I.e. two popups that are allowed to both be open at the same time, due to their relationship with each other. A simple example where this would be desired is a popup menu that contains sub-menus: it is commonly expected to support this pattern, and keep the main menu showing while the sub-menu is shown.
```

Author: Done.

This section details the interactions between the three popup types:

1. If a `popup=hint` is shown, it should hide **any** other open `popup=hint`s, including ancestral `popup=hint`s. (**"You can't nest `popup=hint`s".**)
2. If a `popup=auto` is shown, it should hide **any** open `popup=hint`s, including if the `popup=hint` is an ancestral popup of the `popup=auto`. (**"You can't nest a popup inside a `popup=hint`".**)
3. If you: **a)** show a `popup=auto` (call it D), then **b)** show an **ancestral** `popup=hint` of D (call it T) , then **c)** hide D, the `popup=hint` T should be hidden. (**"A `popup=hint` can be nested inside a popup."**)
4. If you: **a)** show a `popup=auto` (call it D), then **b)** show an **non-ancestral** `popup=hint` (call it T) , then **c)** hide D, the `popup=hint` T should be left showing. (**"Non-nested `popup=hint`s can stay open when unrelated popups are hidden."**)
5. The `defaultopen` attribute should have no effect on `popup=hint`s. I.e. this attribute cannot be used to cause a `popup=hint` to be shown upon page load.
6. The `defaultopen` attribute can be used on as many `popup=async`s as desired, and all of them will be shown upon page load.

> 7. Only the first `popup=auto` (in DOM order) containing the `defaultopen` attribute will be shown upon page load. (This is per-explainer, and included here for completeness.)

Author: Good question! I think probably leftover from the issue where I copied this text. I've removed it.
